A1 a Aa
1
Your EmSaoil:ld to
Tropical House Mix vladislavasemernina@yandex.ru
anne@mail.com
Choose option:
t t
Select option
SEND SEND
Anne Snowdon
HR Manager
9 9
SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE
Gary Loodwig
J J
Aa Aa
ZOBACZ PROFIL ZOBACZ PROFIL Classic tshirt CLICK ME
+ ADD TO CART + ADD TO CART
H H
Health status Search on…
+231,00 120
Aa Aa
Fill the form
Pulse
Your Email
Steps
annes@mail.com
+ DODAJ DO KOSZYKATwoje wydatki Sle+e DpODAJ DO KOSZYKA
Choose option:
Michał Malewicz & Diana Malewicz ZOBACZ PORTFEL MichZaOBłA CMZ POaRTlFeELwicz & Diana Malewicz Wybierz opcję…
Przewodnik po Bali
Opcje portfela
Designing User DesignWYŚLIJing UserWYŚLIJ
Czytaj więcej…
Interfaces Interfaces
Table of
Table of Contents
1/7
INTRO
1. Introduction 3 4. Design and Art 21
2. Who is this book for? 7 5. What makes UI good? 26
3. UI vs UX 14 6. Perception 34
DESIGN BASICS
7. Screens 47 16. Tables 213
8. Layout and grid 55 17. Forms 229
9. Objects 77 18. Modals, popups 261
10. Colors 94 19. Navigation 280
11. Gradients 125 20. Animation 299
12. Typography 139 21. Photos 311
13. Icons 167 22. Illustration 323
14. Buttons 178 23. Language 329
15. Cards 203
BONUS CONTENT
24. Design styles 337 28. Developer handoff 394
25. Design process 351 29. Prototyping 404
26. Design systems 358 30. Summary 415
27. UI Audit 373
2
Introd
1/7
uction
1.
InIntrtodrucotiond
uction
Introdu
Introduction
1/7
Hello! Michał and Diana here.
Thank you so much for purchasing “Designing User Interfaces”!
The idea for this book came to life in December of 2018. While we
were teaching UI design classes, some of our students have asked us,
what's the book with all those PDF materials we've been sending
them one by one after class. Of course, at that time, they were simply
things we put together to make it easier for the students - nothing
more.
We looked around and noticed that a lot of the books on UI are out of
date, short, vague, and often contradictory. We decided to change this
and write this book. Nearly all of the knowledge within these pages is
based on over 500 design projects we completed in the last ten years.
Now we are sharing all that experience with you!
4
!
HOW DO WE KNOW ALL THIS?
Starting in 1999, we have designed hundreds of digital products for
all kinds of devices. That doesn't mean we're all-knowing. We're
continually learning, teaching (which is also a great learning exercise),
and testing new methods for building beautiful, usable digital products.
This book is a summary of our knowledge and our experiences.
We don't assume that what we say here is the only right way to do
things. It's the way we do it.
We want this book to grow and expand over time. That's why we're
open to your suggestions, feedback, and ideas. If you think something
is missing, needs an update or an additional explanation - reach out!
If we use your feedback, we'll add you to the collaborator list at the
end of this volume.
Knowledge is there to share it. While writing this ebook, and talking
to our friends, co-workers, clients, students, and subscribers, we found
out what are the most common problems people encounter while
trying to design digital products. Our main goal was to give you all the
answers to the most common questions, so you don't have to repeat
the same mistakes we have.
Enjoy!
5
HYPE4
In 2013 we co-founded HYPE4 - a design-driven software house. Since
then, we've been working for both small startups and Fortune-500
companies from all over the world. We were lucky enough to be able
to work on nearly every product category (from banking, finance,
advertising, and media to pregnancy tracking).
We started as a small, design-only studio with three employees.
We did the designs, and then external software houses handled the
development. We quickly noticed a huge problem with that approach.
The execution quality was so low that we were rarely satisfied.
In some cases, the designs were butchered beyond recognition.
We decided to take action by starting the development branch of
the company but strictly following our design-driven approach.
All of our developers understand the design principles, and our
designers know a bit how to code. That allows us to achieve a much
higher front-end development precision and overall quality. That has
since become our defining feature.
At HYPE4, we build web and mobile products of all sizes. After hours
we also work on our internal startups and have a lot of fun doing it.
If you'd like to learn more, go to:
h!ps://www.hype4.com
6
Who is
1/7
This book
2.
Who is this
for who is
book for?
this book
Who is
Who is this book for?
HOW TO DESIGN GREAT THINGS?
Each day we use a countless array of digital products. Some are
obvious - like mobile apps and websites. But there are interfaces
everywhere around us now. You interact with ticket machines, payment
terminals, parking meters, alarm clocks, your TV, or your gaming
console.
Most of these products are a result of the work of large groups of
people. Multiple skillsets merge and intersect to create amazing
experiences: designers, marketing ninjas, project managers, developers,
and an occasional genius CEO.
This book will show you the building blocks and good practices, so you
can spot them in the products you use, and improve the products you
make.
8
15 years of experience, 15 years of experience,
and over 500 projects and over 500 projects
“
distilled into the best distilled into the best
design practices. design practices.
DESIGNERS
Designers will gain knowledge on how to make better looking and
more usable products.
It took us years to learn some of these truths the hard way. We've
condensed and simplified all that knowledge, so you don't have to
repeat our mistakes. That will let you grow faster and be better. Good
practices, quick-and-dirty safe hacks, and intentional rule-bending will
allow you to bump up readability and aesthetics of what you design.
Beginners will gain solid ground to improve from, but even experts can
find this book useful.
We worked on over 500 different products from almost every
possible category. From fintech portals, all the way to pregnancy
trackers. The problems we've encountered and the solutions are
all within these pages.
Read on!
10
FRONT-END DEVELOPERS
Front-end developers will learn the basics of design and best practices
on working with designers to speed up and raise the quality of their
implementation work. We believe that every designer should
understand a bit of coding, and every developer should know what
design is all about.
A conscious developer gains another level of understanding of what
he's building, which can quickly bring his work to a whole other level.
This design-fluency is true, especially for junior developers, as they can
grow without repeating the mistakes of others.
margin-left: 44px;
color: #223;
color: #EF1818;
letter-spacing: 0;
text-align: center;
letter-spacing: 0;
line-height: 19px;
background: #EF3030;
border-radius: 25px;
11
STARTUPS
Startup founders will understand how even with smaller budgets, you
can make your MVP shine. After all, a professionally built prototype will
give you better insights about your Product Market Fit, than something
resembling a half-done wireframe. Maximize your chances to gain
user's trust as that leads directly to success.
Remember - people "buy" into a product or service with their eyes
first. Make a great first impression, mix it with an excellent value
proposition, and you've got yourself a hit!
12
MARKETING, SOCIAL MEDIA NINJAS
Marketing and social media ninjas will learn how even the smallest, easy
to do tweaks can drive conversion and readability up. We all want happy,
engaged users interacting with what we do. Eliminating the roadblocks
will help with achieving that.
We'll show you how to wrap your content visually, so it's easy to
understand and has that "premium" look & feel people trust.
Which button do you think will have more conversion?
CURIOUS TYPES
All digital product users will learn how to see the difference between
a good and great product. You'll gain critical thinking and knowledge
of what to look for in an app or a website. That, in turn, will let you get
better at all the other aspects of what you do. Even if it has nothing to
do with pixels displayed on a screen. Precision and aesthetics can go
beyond that, right into our RealWorld™.
DESIGN?
The main ideas behind great products are universal. Planned action,
precision, and care should go into everything we do in life.
Let's make GREAT things.
13
UI VS UX
1/7
UI VS UX
3.
UI vs UX
UI VS UX
UI VS UX
UI vs UX
UI vs UX
DEFINITIONS
Where does the humble interface fit inside the trendy industry
terminology? It's often looked down upon by "real user experience
specialists" as "painting with crayons." We believe this is the wrong
approach. What we see is just as important as information architecture
and business goals.
Customer experience is a high-level category with UX being a part of it,
while UI being a part of the UX process. The diagram below shows the
relation between these elements. To build a great product, you need to
take care of every little detail with great precision.
UI UX CX
15
USER INTERFACE
UI or User Interface is the visual representation of a digital product.
Its obvious use cases are apps and websites. UI is the link between the
user and the functionality of a product. It helps to achieve the desired
outcome through a series of human-machine interactions. It's a series
of text, shapes, graphics, and photographs combined in a way that
allows for a fluid, natural interaction.
An interface is a mix of grid, layout, typography, colors, animations, and
microinteractions. In other words, UI is all that we experience - mostly
with our eyes. UX defined information architecture is a blueprint for
UI's refined final look.
A UI designer is responsible for the final look & feel of the product. The
job is to define its unique style and make it fit the target market. That
visual representation should be readable, usable, and devoid of any
unnecessary, distracting elements.
Random Soda
$ 5,00
Refreshing carbonated soda
with a mint flavor.
Random Soda
$ 5,00
Refreshing carbonated soda
with a mint flavor.
+ ADD TO CART + +A DADD DT OT OC ACRATRT + ADD TO CART
Product Card Component set
16
An Interface is like a joke. An Interface is like a joke.
“
If you have to explain If you have to explain
it, it's not that good. it, it's not that good.
USER EXPERIENCE
UX or User Experience defines and studies how easy it is to use the
product. With digital products, that means the interface, navigation
patterns, and communications. The goal of UX is to allow the largest
possible group of users the ability to understand and use a product.
If the role of a UI designer is the look & feel, the role of a UX designer
is defining how it will work.
Aside from information architecture planning, UX also covers various
kinds of research (surveys, A/B tests, focus groups, interviews,
workshops, and more).
UI is a part of User Experience because readability and looks are also
influencing the ease of use and shape our feelings towards a product.
This book covers the most basic UX principles but focuses heavily on
the UI perspective of design.
Favorite
I'd love an option to add this to
Photo
a list so I can consider purchasing
it at a later date.
Random Soda
A short description right on the
product miniature would be great,
$ 5,00
so I can see the flavor right away...
Refreshing carbonated soda
with a mint flavor.
The bu!ons were too small, I o"en
pressed the wrong one by
accident...
+ ADD TO CART
A basic information architecture (wireframe) and user comments to implement.
18
CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE
CX or Customer Experience is often confused as being another name
for UX. The truth is that CX is a top-level process that defines not only
how your product works, but how your entire company operates.
The CX process is the UX of your product, but also your branding,
marketing, or friendly customer support on the hotline.
You can design Customer Experience by defining clear, consistent rules
for your entire brand. Those rules apply to all the real-world
experiences, as well as UX and UI. They even influence the way you
write your copy.
A good example is one of the popular fitness apps. They changed the
boring "save your workout" message to an "I'm awesome" button.
Customer engagement went up.
All of those elements combine for a consistent, coherent vision with
which our potential customer can quickly identify.
+ ADD TO CART + ADD TO CART Your customer support is great!
They solved all my issues in
a ma!er of minutes! Thanks!!!
BUY NOW BUY NOW
Ordering in the app, and then
picking up the order in the store
was a game-changer!
MAKE PURCHASE MAKE PURCHASE
Changing the brand colors to a more positive, green Merging the digital world ideas
gradient yielded an improvement in user perception with the real world.
of our brand. We also tested various types of label
text to see what works best.
19
PRODUCT DESIGN
In the last few years, many of the UX designers started calling
themselves Product Designers instead. The term merges most UX
competences with UI and basic research, allowing you to solve
a wide range of potential problems.
This new naming convention comes from the fact that UX designer,
as a title, doesn't show which skills the person has. UX designers are
often product owners, researchers, wireframe makers, or all of those
combined.
A product designer can help with both the business processes,
choosing the right building approach, and final interface designs.
It's often the most versatile person in the company that can guide
the rest of the team, including the developers.
Some say Product Design is User Experience design 2.0.
User Interface User Interface
+
Product
User Experience User Experience =
Designer
+
Basic research Basic research
20
Design
1/7
and Art D
4.
Design
Art De
and Art
Design and
Design
Design and Art
ARE UI DESIGNERS ARTISTS?
There often is a perceived equal sign between UI designers and graphic
designers. It's quite an oversimplification that needs clearing. A graphic
designer is commonly associated with being an artist, while UI design
is more of a craft, that adheres to a set of strict rules.
User interfaces are not "painted with pixels," as many people think
about them. They're a precise, visual blueprint for a working product.
They're not artworks on a gallery wall, but rather an architectural plan
- accurate and with very little artistic chaos.
safe area
outer margin
border radius font color, weight, style, shadow
DOWNLOAD color or DOWNLOAD minimum
gradient height
shadow padding or
inner margin
Great interface design is pretty rigid in terms of its rules, constraints,
and regulations. Given too much artistic freedom, it can deviate highly
from the functional specifications, making the resulting product very
hard to use.
22
UI design UI design
“
is definitely is definitely
NOT art. NOT art.
ART AND DESIGN
While it may come in handy, being an illustrator or a painter is not
necessary for UI design. The best interfaces are often a result of
manually entering the right numbers into boxes, instead of artistic
strokes on a graphic tablet. You can be a successful UI designer with
just using a couple of basic, good practices without ever getting out
of the comfort zone.
Readable, useful, and aesthetically pleasing result is the culmination
of a successful UI design.
A couple examples of us testing various visual styles, as seen on our Dribbble profile.
Most of them require additional work to become a truly usable digital product.
DRIBBBLE
Dribbble.com designs are probably the closest intersection of art and
UI design. The main goal of posting a project to Dribbble is to achieve
the highest possible aesthetic effect - often at the cost of functionality.
Many of those designs are either impossible to code, unusable, or not
accessible. Bringing them back towards something that works would
often require a lot of changes.
That's why it's good to use them as inspiration for visual ideas while
being critical and judging the usability of everything you see.
24
Dribbble designs Dribbble designs
often have poor often have poor
usability, but they're usability, but they're
“
a great source of a great source of
visual inspiration. visual inspiration.
Good UI
1/7
Good UI
5.
What makes
Good UI
UI good?
Good UI
Good
Good UI?
WHAT TO LOOK FOR?
Great UI is a sum of many parts. It is the interplay of colors, typography,
interactions, layout, and style that requires a lot of work, experience,
and imagination. If you're starting as a junior designer, try to use the
tested good practices first. Innovation and your very own style will
come naturally, with experience.
A great UI is rarely fully done. In most cases, it's an ongoing process
with changes and updates coming from user feedback and innovative
ideas.
A good place to start is by following the 10 Rules of Good Design by
Dieter Rams. The original set is often called 10 commandments of great
design and is framed on walls of many design studios. Those rules,
however, were meant to initially cover designing real-world objects,
so we adapted them slightly to fit the UI.
The original set of rules was established back in the 70's, but they're
just as relevant today. Precision, attention to detail and careful planning
are all necessary for a great product to take shape. Safe design
methods will allow you to learn these things by following rigid
guidelines. Then, as you get more experience, you can start to bend
these rules or flat-out break them. Always start with the established
good practices, however. Remember - good design is as little design
as possible!
27
Good design Good design
“
makes a product makes a product
easy to use. easy to use.
GOOD DESIGN IS INNOVATIVE
Innovation is great, but it can't come at the expense of usefullness.
A good example is the Twitter "Pull to refresh" interaction pattern.
It was both completely new, yet strangely natural, fun to use way
to refresh your content. It's nearly invisible, yet it made its way into
countless other products. Don't innovate for the sake of being
different - triangular buttons won't replace the classic rectangular
ones anytime in the near future.
The most innovative you can get nowadays is with microinteractions.
Defining how familiar elements affect each other with user input,
is still open to new, creative ideas.
GOOD DESIGN MAKES A PRODUCT USEFUL
Usability is the base of User Experience. UI Usability, however, is
mostly about clarity. Decorative fonts, lack of grid or eye-watering
colors decrease the UI's readability, thus decreasing its usability.
GOOD DESIGN IS AESTHETIC
Aesthetic is quite subjective and a lot has changed with how we
perceive it since the 70's. One thing that hasn't changed is that aesthetic
comes from internal harmony, made by grid, typography, whitespace
and a well planned layout. All designs that are based on good principles
(like the Golden Ratio) will be more aesthetically pleasing, than random
ones.
29
GOOD DESIGN IS LONG-LASTING
If you get your grid and whitespace right, the design will still have
merit, even after a huge shift in design trends. Maybe the gradients
or illustrations won't hold up as well, but design precision and clarity
don't age.
GOOD DESIGN MAKES A PRODUCT UNDERSTANDABLE
Understandable UI is a mix of good readability, proper hierarchy and
the right type of content. Most of these things come from the right
approach to grids, layouts and overall precision. Once the design part is
done, you can work on the language part to match.
GOOD DESIGN IS UNOBTRUSIVE
With modern design tools it's especially easy to go all the way with
colors, animations and sugar-coating. Those kinds of designs look well
on Dribbble portfolios, but often forget that the role of UI is to deliver
content.
How the actual Instagram app looks, is less important than the photos
or videos you can see inside it.
Try not to fall into the trap of form above function. A great interface
fades away after a while - we stop noticing it and using it becomes
natural.
30
