Starting from Scratch
Start with a feature, not a layout
When you start the design for a new app idea, what do you design first? If it’s
the navigation bar at the top of the page, you’re making a mistake.
The easiest way to find yourself frustrated and stuck when working on a new
design is to start by trying to “design the app.” When most people think
about “designing the app”, they’re thinking about theshell.
Should it have a top nav, or a sidebar?
Should the navigation items be on the left, or on the right?
Should the page content be in a container, or should it be full-width?
Where should the logo go?
The thing is, an “app” is actually a collection offeatures. Before you’ve
designed a few features, you don’t even have the information you need to
make a decision about how the navigation should work. No wonder it’s
frustrating!
Start with a feature, not a layout 8
Instead of starting with the shell, start with a piece of actual functionality.
For example, say you’re building a flight booking service. You could start
with a feature like “searching for a flight”.
Your interface will need:
• A field for the departure city
• A field for the destination city
• A field for the departure date
• A field for the return date
• A button to perform the search
Start with that.
Start with a feature, not a layout 9
Hell, you might not even need that other stuff anyways — it worked for
Google.
Detail comes later
In the earliest stages of designing a new feature, it’s important that you don’t
get hung up making low-level decisions about things like typefaces,
shadows, icons, etc.
That stuff will all matter eventually, but it doesn’t matter right now.
If you have trouble ignoring the details when working in a high fidelity
environment like the browser or your favorite design tool, one trick Jason
Fried of Basecamp likes to use is to design on paper using a thick Sharpie.
Obsessing over little details just isn’t possible with a Sharpie, so it can be a
great way to quickly explore a bunch of different layout ideas.
Hold the color
Even when you’re ready to refine an idea in higher fidelity, resist the
temptation to introduce color right away.
Detail comes later 11
By designing in grayscale, you’re forced to use spacing, contrast, and size to
do all of the heavy lifting.
It’s a little more challenging, but you’ll end up with a clearer interface with a
strong hierarchy that’s easy to enhance with color later.
Detail comes later 12
Don’t over-invest
The whole point of designing in low-fidelity is to be able to move fast, so you
can start building the real thing as soon as possible.
Sketches and wireframes are disposable — users can’t do anything with
static mockups. Use them to explore your ideas, and leave them behind
when you’ve made a decision.
Don’t design too much
You don’t need to design every single feature in an app before you move on
to implementation; in fact, it’s better if you don’t.
Figuring out how every feature in a product should interact and how every
edge case should look is really hard, especially in the abstract.
How should this screen look if the user has 2000 contacts?
Where should the error message go in this form?
How should this calendar look when there are two events scheduled at the
same time?
Don’t design too much 14
You’re setting yourself up for frustration by trying to figure this stuff out
using only a design tool and your imagination.
Work in cycles
Instead of designing everything up front, work in short cycles. Start by
designing a simple version of the next feature you want to build.
Once you’re happy with the basic design,make it real.
You’ll probably run into some unexpected complexity along the way, but
that’s the point — it’s a lot easier to fix design problems in an interface you
can actually use than it is to imagine every edge case in advance.
Iterate on the working design until there are no more problems left to solve,
Don’t design too much 15
then jump back into design mode and start working on the next feature.
Don’t get overwhelmed working in the abstract. Build the real thing as early
as possible so your imagination doesn’t have to do all the heavy lifting.
Be a pessimist
Don’t imply functionality in your designs that you aren’t ready to build.
For example, say you’re working on a comment system for a project
management tool. You know that one day, you’d like users to be able to
attach files to their comments, so you include an attachments section in
your design.
Don’t design too much 16
You get deep into implementation only to discover that supporting
attachments is going to bea lotmore work than you anticipated. There’s no
way you have time to finish it right now, so the whole commenting system
sits on the backburner while you take care of other priorities.
The thing is, a comment system with no attachments would still have been
better than no comment system at all, but because you planned to include it
from day one you’ve got nothing you can ship.
When you’re designing a new feature,expect it to be hard to build.
Designing the smallest useful version you can ship reduces that risk
considerably.
If part of a feature is a “nice-to-have”,design it later. Build the simple version
first and you’ll always have something to fall back on.
Choose a personality
Every design has some sort of personality. A banking site might try to
communicatesecureandprofessional, while a trendy new startup might
have a design that feelsfunandplayful.
On the surface, giving a design a particular personality might sound abstract
and handwavy, but a lot of it is determined by a few solid, concrete factors.
Choose a personality 18
Font choice
Typography plays a huge part in determining how a design feels.
If you want an elegant or classic look, you might want to incorporate a serif
typeface in your design:
For a playful look, you could use a rounded sans serif:
Choose a personality 19
If you’re going for a plainer look, or want to rely on other elements to provide
the personality, a neutral sans serif works great:
Color
There’s a lot of science out there on the psychology of color, but in practice,
you really just need to pay attention to how different colors feel to you.
Blue is safe and familiar — nobody ever complains about blue:
Choose a personality 20
Gold might say “expensive” and “sophisticated”:
Pink is a bit more fun, and not so serious:
While trying to choose colors usingonlypsychology isn’t super practical — a
lot of it is just about what looks good to you — it can be helpful to think
about when you’re trying to understandwhyyou think a color is the right fit.
Choose a personality 21
Border radius
As small of a detail as it sounds, if and how much you round the corners in
your design can have a big impact on the overall feel.
A small border radius is pretty neutral, and doesn’t really communicate
much of a personality on its own:
A large border radius starts to feel more playful:
Choose a personality 22
…while no border radius at all feels a lot more serious or formal:
Whatever you choose, it’s important to stay consistent. Mixing square
corners with rounded corners in the same interface almost always looks
worse than sticking with one or the other.
Language
While not a visual design technique per se, the words you use in an interface
have a massive influence on the overall personality.
Using a less personal tone might feel more official or professional:
Choose a personality 23
…while using friendlier, more casual language makes a site feel, well,
friendlier:
Words are everywhere in a user interface, and choosing the right ones is just
as (if not more) important than choosing the right color or typeface.
Deciding what you actually want
A lot of the time you’ll probably just have a gut feeling for the personality
you’re going for. But if you don’t, a great way to simplify the decision is to
take a look at other sites used by the people you want to reach.
If they are mostly pretty “serious business”, maybe that’s how your site
should look too. If they are more playful with a bit of humor, maybe that’s a
better direction to take.
Just try not to borrow too much from direct competitors, you don’t want to
look like a second-rate version of something else.
Limit your choices
Having millions of colors and thousands of fonts to choose from might
sound nice in theory, but in practice it’s usually a paralyzing curse.
And it’s not just fonts and colors, either — you can easily waste time
agonizing over almost any minor design decision.
Should this text be 12px or 13px?
Should this box shadow have a 10% opacity or a 15% opacity?
Should this avatar be 24px or 25px tall?
Should I use a medium font weight for this button or semibold?
Should this headline have a bottom margin of 18px or 20px?
When you’re designing without constraints, decision-making is torture
because there’s always going to be more than one right choice.
For example, these buttons all have different background colors, but it’s
almost impossible to tell the difference between them by just looking at
them.
How are you supposed to make a confident decision if none of these would
really be bad choices?
Limit your choices 25
Define systems in advance
Instead of hand-picking values from a limitless pool any time you need to
make a decision,start with a smaller set of options.
Don’t reach for the color picker every time you need to pick a new shade of
blue — choose from a set of 8-10 shades picked out ahead of time.
Similarly, don’t tweak a font size one pixel at a time until it looks perfect.
Define a restrictive type scale in advance and use that to make any future
font size decisions.
Limit your choices 26
When you build systems like this, you only have to do the hard work of
picking the initial valuesonceinstead of every time you’re designing a new
piece of UI. It’s a bit more work up front, but it’s worth it — it’ll save you a ton
of decision fatigue down the road.
Designing by process of elimination
When you’re designing using a constrained set of values, decision-making is
a lot easier because there are a lot fewer “right” choices.
For example, say you’re trying to choose a size for an icon. You’ve defined a
sizing scale in advance where your only small-to-medium sized options are
12px, 16px, 24px, and 32px.
To pick the best option, start by taking a guess at which one will look best,
maybe 16px. Then try the values on either side (12px and 24px) for
comparison.
Chances are, two of those options will seem likeobviouslybad choices. If it’s
the options on the outside, you’re done — the middle option is the only good
choice.
Limit your choices 27
If one of the outer options looks best, do another comparison using that
option as the “middle” value and make sure there’s not a better choice.
This approach works for anything where you’ve defined a system. When
you’re limited to a set of options that all look noticeably different, picking the
best one is a piece of cake.
Systematize everything
The more systems you have in place, the faster you’ll be able to work and the
less you’ll second guess your own decisions.
You’ll want systems for things like:
• Font size
• Font weight
• Line height
• Color
• Margin
• Padding
• Width
• Height
• Box shadows
Limit your choices 28
• Border radius
• Border width
• Opacity
…and anything else you run into where it feels like you’re laboring over a low-
level design decision.
You don’t have to define all of this stuff ahead of time, just make sure you’re
approaching design with a system-focused mindset. Look for opportunities
to introduce new systems as you make new decisions, and try to avoid
having to make the same minor decision twice.
Designing with systems is going to be a recurring theme throughout this
book, and in later chapters we’ll talk about building a lot of these systems in
finer detail.
Hierarchy is Everything
Not all elements are equal
When you think of visual design as “styling things so they look good”, it’s
easy to see why it might feel hard to achieve without innate artistic talent.
But it turns out that one of the biggest factors in making something “look
good” has nothing to do with superficial styling at all.
Visual hierarchyrefers to how important the elements in an interface appear
in relation to one another, and it’s the most effective tool you have for
making something feel “designed”.
When everything in an interface is competing for attention, it feels noisy and
chaotic, like one big wall of content where it’s not clear what actually
matters:
Not all elements are equal 31
When you deliberately de-emphasize secondary and tertiary information,
and make an effort to highlight the elements that are most important, the
result is immediately more pleasing, even though the color scheme, font
choice, and layout haven’t changed:
So how do you actually make this happen? In the following chapters, we’ll
cover a number of specific strategies you can use to introduce hierarchy into
your designs.
Size isn’t everything
Relying too much on font size to control your hierarchy is a mistake — it
often leads to primary content that’s too large, and secondary content that’s
too small.
Instead of leaving all of the heavy lifting to font size alone, try using font
weight or color to do the same job.
For example, making a primary element bolder lets you use a more
Size isn’t everything 33
reasonable font size, and often does a better job at communicating its
importance anyways:
Similarly, using a softer color for supporting text instead of a tiny font size
makes it clear that the text is secondary while sacrificing less on readability:
Size isn’t everything 34
Try and stick to two or three colors:
• A dark color for primary content (like the headline of an article)
• A grey for secondary content (like the date an article was published)
• A lighter grey for tertiary content (maybe the copyright notice in a
footer)
Similarly, two font weights are usually enough for UI work:
• A normal font weight (400 or 500 depending on the font) for most text
• A heavier font weight (600 or 700) for text you want to emphasize
Stay away from font weights under 400 for UI work — they can work for
large headings but are too hard to read at smaller sizes. If you’re considering
Size isn’t everything 35
using a lighter weight to de-emphasize some text, use a lighter color or
smaller font size instead.
Don’t use grey text on colored
backgrounds
Making text a lighter grey is a great way to de-emphasize it on white
backgrounds, but it doesn’t look so great on colored backgrounds.
That’s because the effect we’re actually seeing with grey on white isreduced
contrast.
Don’t use grey text on colored backgrounds 37
Making the text closer to the background color is what actually helps create
hierarchy, not making it light grey.
You might think that the easiest way to achieve this is to use white text and
reduce the opacity:
While thisdoesreduce the contrast, it often results in text that looks dull,
washed out, and sometimes even disabled.
Don’t use grey text on colored backgrounds 38
Even worse, using this approach on top of an image or pattern means the
background will show through the text:
A better approach is tohand-pick a new color, based on the background
color.
Choose a color with the same hue, and adjust the saturation and lightness
until it looks right to you:
Hand-picking a color this way makes it easy to reduce the contrast without
the text looking faded.
Emphasize by de-emphasizing
Sometimes you’ll run into a situation where the main element of an interface
isn’t standing out enough, but there’s nothing you can add to it to give it the
emphasis it needs.
For example, despite trying to make this active nav item “pop” by giving it a
different color, it still doesn’t really stand out compared to the inactive items:
When you run into situations like this, instead of trying to further emphasize
the element you want to draw attention to, figure out how you cande-
emphasizethe elements that are competing with it.
In this example, you could do that by giving the inactive items a softer color
so they sit more in the background:
You can apply this thinking to bigger pieces of an interface as well. For
Emphasize by de-emphasizing 40
example, if a sidebar feels like it’s competing with your main content area,
don’t give it a background color — let the content sit directly on the page
background instead:
Labels are a last resort
Put down the accessibility pitchfork — this isn’t about forms.
When presenting data to the user (especially data from the database), it’s
easy to fall into the trap of displaying it using a naivelabel: valueformat.
The problem with this approach is that it makes it difficult to present the
data with any sort of hierarchy; every piece of data is given equal emphasis.
You might not need a label at all
In a lot of situations, you can tell what a piece of data is just by looking at the
format.
For example,janedoe@example.comis an email address,(555) 765-4321is a
phone number and$19.99is a price.
When the format isn’t enough, the context often is. When you see the phrase
“Customer Support”listed below someone’s name in an employee directory,
Labels are a last resort 42
you don’t need a label to make the connection that that is the department
the person works in.
When you’re able to present data without labels, it’s much easier to
emphasize important or identifying information, making the interface easier
to use while at the same time making it feel more “designed”.
Combine labels and values
Even when a piece of data isn’t completely clear without a label, you can
often avoid adding a label by adding clarifying text to the value.
For example, if you need to display inventory in an e-commerce interface,
instead of “In stock: 12”, try something like “12 left in stock”.
Labels are a last resort 43
If you’re building a real estate app, something like “Bedrooms: 3” could
simply become “3 bedrooms”.
When you’re able to combine labels and values into a single unit, it’s much
easier to give each piece of data meaningful styling without sacrificing on
clarity.
Labels are secondary
Sometimes you reallydoneed a label; for example when you’re displaying
multiple pieces of similar data and they need to be easily scannable, like on
a dashboard.
Labels are a last resort 44
In these situations, add the label, but treat it as supporting content. The data
itself is what matters, the label is just there for clarity.
De-emphasize the label by making it smaller, reducing the contrast, using a
lighter font weight, or some combination of all three.
When to emphasize a label
If you’re designing an interface where you know the user will belooking for
the label, it might make sense to emphasize the label instead of the data.
This is often the case on information-dense pages, like the technical
specifications of a product.
If a user is trying to find out the dimensions of a smartphone, they’re
probably scanning the page for words like “depth”, not “7.6mm”.
Labels are a last resort 45
Don’t de-emphasize the datatoomuch in these scenarios; it’s still important
information. Simply using a darker color for the label and a slightly lighter
color for the value is often enough.
Separate visual hierarchy from
document hierarchy
It’s important to use semantic markup when building for the web, which
means you’ll often be using heading tags likeh1,h2, orh3if you decide to add
a title to part of an interface.
By default, web browsers assign progressively smaller font sizes to heading
elements, so anh1is pretty large, and anh6is pretty small. This can be
helpful for document-style content like articles or documentation, but it can
encourage some bad decisions in application UIs.
Using anh1tag to add a title likeManage Accountto a page makes perfect
sense semantically, but because we’re trained to believe thath1elements
should be big, it’s easy to fall into the trap of making those titles bigger than
they really need to be.
Separate visual hierarchy from document hierarchy 47
A lot of the time, section titles act more likelabelsthan headings — they are
supportive content, they shouldn’t be stealing all the attention.
Usually thecontentin that section should be the focus, not the title. That
means that a lot of the time, titles should actually be pretty small:
Taken to the extreme, you might even include section titles in your markup
for accessibility reasons butcompletely hidethem visually because the
content speaks for itself.
Don’t let the element you’re using influence how you choose to style it —
pick elements for semantic purposes and style them however you need to
create the best visual hierarchy.
Balance weight and contrast
The reason bold text feels emphasized compared to regular text is that bold
text covers more surface area — in the same amount of space, more pixels
are used for text than for the background.
So why is this interesting? Well it turns out that the relationship between
surface area and hierarchy has implications on other elements in a UI as well.
Using contrast to compensate for weight
One of the places understanding this relationship becomes important is
when working with icons.
Just like bold text, icons(especially solid ones)are generally pretty “heavy”
and cover a lot of surface area. As a result, when you put an icon next to
some text, the icon tends to feel emphasized.
Balance weight and contrast 49
Unlike text, there’s no way to change the “weight” of an icon, so to create
balance it needs to be de-emphasized in some other way.
A simple and effective way to do this is to lower the contrast of the icon by
giving it a softer color.
Balance weight and contrast 50
This works anywhere you need to balance elements that have different
weights. Reducing the contrast works like a counterbalance, making heavier
elements feel lighter even though the weight hasn’t changed.
Using weight to compensate for contrast
Just like how reducing contrast helps to de-emphasize heavy elements,
increasing weight is a great way to add a bit of emphasis to low contrast
elements.
This is useful when things like thin 1px borders are too subtle using a soft
color, but darkening the color makes the design feel harsh and noisy.
Balance weight and contrast 51
Making the border a bit heavier by increasing the width helps to emphasize
it without losing the softer look:
Semantics are secondary
When there are multiple actions a user can take on a page, it’s easy to fall
into the trap of designing those actions based purely on semantics.
Semantics are an important part of button design, but that doesn’t mean you
can forget about hierarchy.
Every action on a page sits somewhere in a pyramid of importance. Most
pages only have one true primary action, a couple of less important
secondary actions, and a few seldom used tertiary actions.
When designing these actions, it’s important to communicate their place in
the hierarchy.
• Primary actions should be obvious.Solid, high contrast background
colors work great here.
Semantics are secondary 53
• Secondary actions should be clear but not prominent.Outline styles or
lower contrast background colors are great options.
• Tertiary actions should be discoverable but unobtrusive.Styling these
actions like links is usually the best approach.
When you take a hierarchy-first approach to designing the actions on page,
the result is a much less busy UI that communicates more clearly:
Semantics are secondary 54
Destructive actions
Being destructive or high severity doesn’t automatically mean a button
should be big, red, and bold.
If a destructive action isn’t the primary action on the page, it might be better
to give it a secondary or tertiary button treatment.
Combine this with a confirmation step where the destructive action actually
is the primary action, and apply the big, red, bold styling there.
Layout and Spacing
Start with too much white space
One of the easiest ways to clean up a design is to simply give every element
a little more room to breathe.
Sounds simple enough, right? So how come we don’t usually do it?
Start with too much white space 57
White space should be removed, not added
When designing for the web, white space is almost alwaysaddedto a design
— if something looks little too cramped, you add a bit of margin or padding
until things look better.
The problem with this approach is that elements are only given the minimum
amount of breathing room necessary to not lookactively bad. To make
something actually lookgreat, you usually need more white space.
Start with too much white space 58
A better approach is to start by giving somethingway too muchspace, then
remove it until you’re happy with the result.
Start with too much white space 59
You might think you’d end up with too much white space this way, but in
practice, what might seem like “a little too much” when focused on an
individual element ends up being closer to “just enough” in the context of a
complete UI.
Dense UIs have their place
While interfaces with a lot of breathing room almost always feel cleaner and
simpler, there are certainly situations where it makes sense for a design to be
much more compact.
For example, if you’re designing some sort of dashboard where a lot of
information needs to be visible at once, packing that information together so
it all fits on one screen might be worth making the design feel more busy.
The important thing is to make this a deliberate decision instead of just
being the default. It’s a lot more obvious when you need to remove white
space than it is when you need to add it.
Establish a spacing and sizing
system
You shouldn’t be nitpicking between 120px and 125px when trying to decide
on the perfect size for an element in your UI.
Painfully trialing arbitrary values one pixel at a time will drastically slow you
down at best, and create ugly, inconsistent designs at worst.
Instead, limit yourself to a constrained set of values, defined in advance.
Establish a spacing and sizing system 61
A linear scale won’t work
Creating a spacing and sizing system isn’t quite as simple as something like
“make sure everything is a multiple of 4px”— a naive approach like that
doesn’t make it any easier to choose between 120px and 125px.
For a system to be truly useful, it needs to take into consideration therelative
difference between adjacent values.
At the small end of the scale(like the size of an icon, or the padding inside a
button), a couple of pixels can make a big difference. Jumping from 12px to
16px is an increase of 33%!
But at the large end(the width of a card, or the vertical spacing in a landing
page hero), a couple of pixels is basically imperceivable. Even increasing the
width of a card from 500px to 520px is only a difference of 4%, which is
eight timesless significant than the jump from 12px to 16px.
Establish a spacing and sizing system 62
If you want your system to make sizing decisions easy, make sure no two
values in your scale are ever closer than about 25%.
Defining the system
Just like you don’t want to toil over arbitrary values when sizing an element
or fine-tuning the space between elements, you don’t want to build your
spacing and sizing scale from arbitrary values either.
A simple approach is to start with a sensiblebasevalue, then build a scale
using factors and multiples of that value.
16px is a great number to start with because it divides nicely, and also
happens to be the default font size in every major web browser.
Establish a spacing and sizing system 63
The values at the small end of the scale should start pretty packed together,
and get progressively more spaced apart as you get further up the scale.
Here’s an example of a fairly practical scale built using this approach:
Using the system
Once you’ve defined your spacing and sizing system, you’ll find that you’re
able to design a hell of a lot faster, especially if you design in the browser
(sticking to a system is easier when you’re typing in numbers than when
you’re dragging with the mouse.)
Establish a spacing and sizing system 64
Need to add some space under an element? Grab a value from your scale
and try it out. Not quite enough? The next value is probably perfect.
While the workflow improvements are probably the biggest benefit, you’ll
also start to notice a subtle consistency in your designs that wasn’t there
before, and things will look just a little bit cleaner.
A spacing and sizing system will help you create better designs, with less
effort, in less time. Design advice doesn’t get much more valuable than that.
You don’t have to fill the whole
screen
Remember when 960px was the de facto layout width for desktop-size
designs? These days you’d be hard-pressed to find aphonewith a resolution
that low.
So it’s no surprise that when most of us open our design tool of choice on
our high resolution displays, we give ourselvesat least1200-1400px of space
to fill. But just because you have the space, doesn’t mean you need to use it.
If you only need 600px, use 600px. Spreading things out or making things
unnecessarily wide just makes an interface harder to interpret, while a little
extra space around the edges never hurt anyone.
You don’t have to fill the whole screen 66
This is just as applicable to individual sections of an interface, too. You don’t
need to makeeverythingfull-width just because something else (like your
navigation) is full-width.
You don’t have to fill the whole screen 67
Give each element just the space it needs — don’t make something worse
just to make it match something else.
Shrink the canvas
If you’re having a hard time designing a small interface on a large canvas,
shrink the canvas! A lot of the time it’s easier to design something small
when the constraints are real.
If you’re building a responsive web application, try starting with a ~400px
canvas and designing the mobile layout first.
You don’t have to fill the whole screen 68
Once you have a mobile design you’re happy with, bring it over to a larger
size screen and adjust anything that felt like a compromise on smaller
screens. Odds are you won’t have to change as much as you think.
Thinking in columns
If you’re designing something that works best at a narrower width but feels
unbalanced in the context of an otherwise wide UI, see if you can split it into
columns instead of just making it wider.
You don’t have to fill the whole screen 69
For example, take this narrow form layout:
You don’t have to fill the whole screen 70
If you wanted to make better use of the available space without making the
form harder to use, you could break the supporting text out into a separate
column:
This makes the design feel more balanced and consistent without
compromising on the optimal width for the form itself.
You don’t have to fill the whole screen 71
Don’t force it
Just like you shouldn’t worry about filling the whole screen, you shouldn’t try
to cram everything into a small area unnecessarily either.
If you need a lot of space, go for it! Just don’t feel obligated to fill it if you
don’t have to.
Grids are overrated
Using a system like a 12-column grid is a great way to simplify layout
decisions, and can bring a satisfying sense of order to your designs.
But even though grids can be useful, outsourcingallof your layout decisions
to a grid can do more harm than good.
Not all elements should be fluid
Fundamentally, a grid system is just about giving elements fluid, percentage-
based widths, where you’re choosing from a constrained set of percentages.
For example, in a 12-column grid each column is 8.33% wide. As long as an
Grids are overrated 73
element’s width is some multiple of 8.33%(including any gutters), that
element is “on the grid”.
The problem with treating grid systems like a religion is that there are a lot of
situations where it makes much more sense for an element to have afixed
width instead of a relative width.
For example, consider a traditional sidebar layout. Using a 12-column grid
system, you might give the sidebar a width of three columns (25%) and the
main content area a width of nine columns (75%).
Grids are overrated 74
This might seem fine at first, but think about what happens when you resize
the screen.
If you make the screen wider the sidebar gets wider too, taking up space
that could’ve been put to better use by the main content area.
Similarly, if you make the screen narrower, the sidebar can shrink below its
minimum reasonable width, causing awkward text wrapping or truncation.
In this situation, it makes much more sense to give the sidebar a fixed width
that’s optimized for its contents. The main content area can then flex to fill
the remaining space, using its owninternalgrid to lay out its children.
Grids are overrated 75
This applies within components, too — don’t use percentages to size
something unless you actually want it to scale.
Grids are overrated 76
Don’t shrink an element until you need to
Say you’re designing a login card. Using the full screen width would look
ugly, so you give it a width of 6 columns (50%) with a 3-column offset on
each side.
On medium-sized screens you realize the card is a little narrow even though
you have the space to make it bigger, so at that screen size you switch it to a
width of 8 columns, with two empty columns on each side.
Grids are overrated 77
The silly thing about this approach is that because column widths are fluid,
there’s a range in screen sizes where the login card iswideron medium
screens than it is on large screens:
If you know that say 500px is the optimal size for the card, why should it
ever get smaller than that if you have the space for it?
Instead of sizing elements like this based on a grid, give them a max-width
so they don’t get too large, and only force them to shrink when the screen
gets smaller than that max-width.
Grids are overrated 78
Don’t be a slave to the grid — give your components the space they need
and don’t make any compromises until it’s actually necessary.
Relative sizing doesn’t scale
It’s tempting to believe that every part of an interface should be sized
relative to one another, and that if element A needs to shrink by 25% on
smaller screens, that element B should shrink by 25%, too.
For example, say you’re designing an article at a large screen size. If your
body copy is 18px and your headlines are 45px, it’s tempting to encode that
relationship by defining your headline size as2.5em; 2.5 times the current
font size.
There’s nothing inherently wrong with using relative units likeem, but don’t
be fooled into believing that relationships defined this way can remain static
— 2.5em might be the perfect headline size on desktop but there’s no
guarantee that it’ll be the right size on smaller screens.
Relative sizing doesn’t scale 80
Say you reduce the size of your body copy to 14px on small screens to keep
the line length in check. Keeping your headlines at 2.5em means a rendered
font size of 35px — way too big for a small screen!
A better headline size for small screens might be somewhere between 20px
and 24px:
Relative sizing doesn’t scale 81
That’s only 1.5-1.7x the size of the 14px body copy — a totally different
relationship than what made sense on desktop screens. That means there
isn’t any real relationship at all, and that there’s no real benefit in trying to
define the headline size relative to the body copy size.
As a general rule, elements that are large on large screens need to shrink
fasterthan elements that are already fairly small — the difference between
small elements and large elements should be less extreme at small screen
sizes.
Relationships within elements
The idea that things should scale independently doesn’t just apply to sizing
elements at different screen sizes; it applies to the properties of a single
component, too.
Say you’ve designed a button. It’s got a 16px font size, 16px of horizontal
padding, and 12px of vertical padding:
Much like the previous example, it’s tempting to think that the padding
should be defined in terms of the current font size. That way if you want a
larger or smaller button, you only need to change the font size and the
padding will update automatically, right?
Relative sizing doesn’t scale 82
This works — the buttonsdoscale up or down and preserve the same
proportions. But is that what we really want?
Compare that to these buttons, where the padding gets more generous at
larger sizes and disproportionately tighter at smaller sizes:
Here the large button actuallyfeelslike a larger button, and the small
buttons actually feel like smaller buttons, not like we simply adjusted the
zoom.
Let go of the idea that everything needs to scale proportionately — giving
yourself the freedom to fine-tune things independently makes it a hell of a
lot easier to design for multiple contexts.
Avoid ambiguous spacing
When groups of elements are explicitly separated — usually by a border or
background color — it’s obvious which elements belong to which group.
But when there isn’t a visible separator, it’s not always so obvious.
Say you’re designing a form with stacked labels and inputs. If the margin
below the label is the same as the margin below the input, the elements in
the form group won’t feel obviously “connected”.
Avoid ambiguous spacing 84
At best the user has to work harder to interpret the UI, and at worst it means
accidentally putting the wrong data in the wrong field.
The fix is to increase the space between each form group so it’s clear which
label belongs to which input:
Avoid ambiguous spacing 85
This same problem shows up in article design when there’s not enough
space above section headings:
…and in bulleted lists, when the space between bullets matches the line-
height of a single bullet:
Avoid ambiguous spacing 86
It’s not just vertical spacing that you have to worry about either; it’s easy to
make this mistake with components that are laid out horizontally, too:
Whenever you’re relying on spacing to connect a group of elements, always
make sure there’s more spacearoundthe group than there is within it —
interfaces that are hard to understand always look worse.
Designing Text
Establish a type scale
Most interfaces use way too many font sizes. Unless a team has a rigid
design system in place, it’s not uncommon to find that every pixel value from
10px to 24px has been used in the UIsomewhere.
Choosing font sizes without a system is a bad idea for two reasons:
1. It leads to annoying inconsistencies in your designs.
2. It slows down your workflow.
So how do you define a type system?
Establish a type scale 89
Choosing a scale
Just like with spacing and sizing,a linear scale won’t work. Smaller jumps
between font sizes are useful at the bottom of the scale, but you don’t want
to waste time deciding between 46px and 48px for a large headline.
Modular scales
One approach is to calculate your type scale using aratio, like 4:5(a “major
third”), 2:3(a “perfect fifth”), or perhaps the “golden ratio”, 1:1.618. This is
often called a “modular scale”.
You start with a sensible base value(16px is common since it’s the default
font size for most browsers), apply your ratio to get the next value, then
apply your ratio tothatvalue to get the next value, and so on and so forth:
Establish a type scale 90
The mathematical purity of this approach is alluring, but in practice, it’s not
perfect for a couple of reasons.
1. You end up with fractional values.
Using a 16px base and 4:5 ratio, your scale will end up with lots of sizes
that don’t land right on the pixel, like 31.25px, 39.063px, 48.828px, etc.
Browsers all handle subpixel rounding a little bit differently, so it’s best to
avoid fractional sizes if you can avoid it.
If you do want to use this approach, make sure you round the values
yourself when defining the scale to avoid off-by-one pixel issues across
browsers.
2. You usually need more sizes.
This approach can work well if you’re defining a type scale for long form
content like an article, but for interface design, the jumps you get using
a modular scale are often a bittoolimiting.
With a(rounded)3:4 type scale, you get sizes like 12px, 16px, 21px, and
28px. While this might not seem too limiting on the surface, in practice
you’re going to wish you had a size between 12px and 16px, and another
between 16px and 21px.
You could use a tighter ratio like 8:9, but at this point you’re just trying to
pick a scale that happens to match the sizes you already know you want.
Hand-crafted scales
For interface design, a more practical approach is to simply pick values by
hand. You don’t have to worry about subpixel rounding errors this way, and
you have total control over which sizes exist instead of outsourcing that job
to some mathematical formula.
Establish a type scale 91
Here’s an example of a scale that works well for most projects and aligns
nicely with the spacing and sizing scale recommended in“Establishing a
spacing and sizing system”:
It’s constrained just enough to speed up your decision making, but isn’t so
limited as to make you feel like you’re missing a useful size.
Establish a type scale 92
Avoid em units
When you’re building a type scale, don’t useemunits to define your sizes.
Becauseemunits are relative to the current font size, the computed font size
of nested elements is often not actually a value in your scale.
For example, say you’ve defined an em-based type scale like this:
Establish a type scale 93
If you give an element a font size of 1.25em(20px by default), inside of that
element 1em is now equal to 20px. That means that if you give one of the
nestedelements a font size of .875em, the actual computed font size is
17.5px, not a value from your type scale!
Stick topxorremunits — it’s the only way to guarantee you’re actually
sticking to the system.
Use good fonts
With thousands of different typefaces out there to choose from, separating
the good from the bad can be an intimidating task.
Developing an eye for all of the details that make a good typeface can take
years. You probably don’t have years, so here are a few tricks you can use to
start picking out high quality typefaces right away.
Play it safe
For UI design, your safest bet is a fairly neutral sans-serif — think something
like Helvetica.
If you really don’t trust your own taste, one great option is to rely on the
system font stack:
-apple-system, Segoe UI, Roboto, Noto Sans, Ubuntu, Cantarell, Helvetica Neue;
Use good fonts 95
It might not be the most ambitious choice, but at least your users will
already be used to seeing it.
Ignore typefaces with less than five weights
This isn’talwaystrue, but as a general rule, typefaces that come in a lot of
different weights tend to be crafted with more care and attention to detail
than typefaces with fewer weights.
Many font directories(like Google Fonts)will let you filter by “number of
styles”, which is a combination of the available weights as well as the italic
variations of those weights.
A great way to limit the number of options you have to choose from is to
crank that up to 10+(to account for italics):
Use good fonts 96
On Google Fonts specifically, that cuts out 85% of the available options,
leaving you with less than 50 sans-serifs to choose from.
Optimize for legibility
When someone designs a font family, they are usually designing it for a
specific purpose. Fonts meant for headlines usually have tighter letter-
spacing and shorter lowercase letters(a shorter x-height), while fonts meant
for smaller sizes have wider letter-spacing and taller lowercase letters.
Keep this in mind and avoid using condensed typefaces with short x-heights
for your main UI text.
Trust the wisdom of the crowd
If a font is popular, it’s probably a good font. Most font directories will let you
sort by popularity, so this can be a great way to limit your choices.
This is especially useful when you’re trying to pick out something other than
a neutral UI typeface. Picking a nice serif with some personality for example
can be tough.
Use good fonts 97
Leveraging the collective decision-making power of thousands of other
people can make it a lot easier.
Steal from people who care
Inspect some of your favorite sites and see what typefaces they are using.
Use good fonts 98
There are a lot of great design teams out there full of people withreally
strong opinions about typography, and they’ll often choose great fonts that
you might have never found using some of the safer approaches outlined
above.
Developing your intuition
Once you start paying closer attention to the typography on well-designed
sites, it’s not long before you feel pretty comfortable labeling a typeface as
awesome or terrible.
You’re gonna be a type snob soon enough, but the advice outlined above will
help get you by in the meantime.
Keep your line length in check
When styling paragraphs, it’s easy to make the mistake of fitting the text to
your layout instead of trying to create the best reading experience.
Usually this means lines that are too long, making text harder to read.
For the best reading experience, make your paragraphs wide enough to fit
between 45 and 75 characters per line. The easiest way to do this on the
web is usingemunits, which are relative to the current font size. A width of
20-35em will get you in the right ballpark.
Keep your line length in check 100
Going a bit wider than 75 characters per line can sometimes work too, but
be aware that you’re entering risky territory — stick to the 45-75 range if you
want to play it safe.
Dealing with wider content
If you’re mixing paragraph text with images or other large components, you
should still limit the paragraph width even if the overall content area needs
to be wider to accommodate the other elements.
